HHS Public Access
Author manuscript
Author Manuscript

Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.
Published in final edited form as:
Stat Med. 2024 July 10; 43(15): 2853–2868. doi:10.1002/sim.10102.

G-Formula for Observational Studies under Stratified
Interference, with Application to Bed Net Use on Malaria
Kayla W. Kilpatrick1, Chanhwa Lee2, Michael G. Hudgens*,2
1Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, U.S.A.
2Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, U.S.A.

Author Manuscript

Summary

Author Manuscript

Assessing population-level effects of vaccines and other infectious disease prevention measures
is important to the field of public health. In infectious disease studies, one person’s treatment
may affect another individual’s outcome, i.e., there may be interference between units. For
example, the use of bed nets to prevent malaria by one individual may have an indirect effect
on other individuals living in close proximity. In some settings, individuals may form groups or
clusters where interference only occurs within groups, i.e., there is partial interference. Inverse
probability weighted estimators have previously been developed for observational studies with
partial interference. Unfortunately, these estimators are not well suited for studies with large
clusters. Therefore, in this paper, the parametric g-formula is extended to allow for partial
interference. G-formula estimators are proposed for overall effects, effects when treated, and
effects when untreated. The proposed estimators can accommodate large clusters and do not suffer
from the g-null paradox that may occur in the absence of interference. The large sample properties
of the proposed estimators are derived assuming no unmeasured confounders and that the partial
interference takes a particular form (referred to as ‘weak stratified interference’). Simulation
studies are presented demonstrating the finite-sample performance of the proposed estimators. The
Demographic and Health Survey from the Democratic Republic of the Congo is then analyzed
using the proposed g-formula estimators to assess the effects of bed net use on malaria.

Keywords
Causal inference; G-formula; Herd immunity; Observational studies

Author Manuscript

1∣

INTRODUCTION
In settings where individuals interact or are connected, one individual’s treatment status may
affect another individual’s outcome, i.e., interference may be present between individuals1.
Interference is common in infectious disease research. For instance, if one individual wears a
mask, this could affect whether another individual develops COVID-19. In some settings, it
may be reasonable to assume that individuals within a cluster (or group) may interfere with
one another, but not with individuals in other clusters, i.e., there is partial (or clustered)

*

Correspondence Michael G. Hudgens, Department of Biostatistics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, North Carolina,
U.S.A., mhudgens@email.unc.edu.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 2

Author Manuscript

interference2. Clusters might entail households, villages, schools, or other hierarchical
structures. For instance, when assessing the effect of an intervention or exposure in students,
it may be reasonable to assume no interference between students in different schools. Under
this partial interference setting, several methods have been proposed for drawing inference
about causal estimands of treatment effects; e.g., Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele3,
Papadogeorgou et al.4, Barkley et al.5 and Park and Kang6.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

In the presence of interference, it is of interest to assess the effect of policies that alter
the distribution of treatment in the population. For instance, in the Democratic Republic
of the Congo, public health officials and policymakers may be interested in estimates of
malaria risk for different levels of bed net usage in the population. In observational studies
where partial interference is present, it may be unlikely that treatment selection among
individuals in the same cluster is independent. For example, in household studies of vaccine
effects, we might expect vaccine uptake to be positively correlated between individuals in
the same household. Therefore, estimands that will be most relevant to policymakers need
to account for possible within-cluster treatment selection dependence. Papadogeorgou et al.
4 and Barkley et al. 5 proposed such estimands and developed corresponding inferential
methods using inverse probability weighted (IPW) estimators. These IPW estimators entail
inverse weighting by an estimated group propensity score. Unfortunately, this approach is
not well suited for large groups, because, in practice, the estimated group propensity score
is often computed by multiplying individual propensity score estimates across individuals
within the same cluster. When clusters are large, this product of individual propensity scores
(each of which is between 0 and 1) will tend to be very small. In the absence of interference,
a commonly used alternative to the IPW estimator is the parametric g-formula, which entails
combining outcome regression and standardization7,8. This paper proposes an extension of
the parametric g-formula for observational studies where partial interference may be present,
which is better suited for large clusters compared to IPW.

Author Manuscript

The proposed methods were motivated by the 2013-14 Democratic Republic of the Congo
(DRC) Demographic and Health Survey (DHS), a nationally representative survey to
gather information about fertility, maternal and child health, sexually transmitted infections,
mosquito net (hereafter “bed net”) usage, malaria, and other health information9. In the
analysis presented below, population-level effects of bed net use on malaria are assessed
using data from the DRC DHS. Figure 1 displays province-level bed net use and the
proportion of children who did not use bed nets with malaria. The DHS data were
collected at the household level. For the analysis here, a single linkage agglomerative
cluster method was used to group individuals into clusters based on their household global
positioning system (GPS) coordinates, resulting in a total of 395 clusters with at least
one child and measured spatial information and other covariates. After performing this
clustering algorithm, covariates and bed net use data are available for approximately 87,500
individuals. Malaria outcome data is available for about 7,500 children between 6 to 59
months (for brevity, henceforth referred to as "children"). Among the clusters with at least
one child who did not use a bed net, the prevalence of malaria in children who did not
use bed nets is inversely associated with the proportion of bed net usage in the cluster
(Spearman correlation rs = − 0.16, p = 0.002), suggesting the possibility of interference

Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 3

Author Manuscript

within clusters. Because malaria is spread between humans via the Anopheles mosquito,
interference is epidemiologically plausible in this setting; e.g., if an individual with malaria
elects to use a bed net, then the likelihood of a mosquito transmitting malaria from that
individual to another individual may be decreased. Previously, Levitz et al.10 showed that
community-level bed net usage was significantly associated with protection against malaria
in children younger than five years old. The inferential goal of this paper is to assess the
population-level effects of bed use on malaria while allowing for possible within-cluster
interference.

Author Manuscript

The outline of the remainder of this paper is as follows. Section 2 presents the proposed
extension of the g-formula to allow for partial interference. Section 3 presents the simulation
results evaluating the performance of the proposed methods in finite samples. In Section 4,
the proposed estimators are employed to assess the effect of bed net use on malaria using
data from the DRC DHS. Section 5 concludes with a discussion.

2∣

METHODS

2.1 ∣

Estimands and Effects of Interest
Suppose data is observed on m clusters of individuals, and let Ni denote the number
of individuals in cluster i. Suppose some individuals within each cluster may receive
treatment (e.g., bed net) and denote the vector of binary treatment indicators in cluster i
as Ai = (Ai1, Ai2, …, AiNi) with Aij representing the treatment indicator for individual j. Let
N

Si = (∑j =i 1 Aij) ∕ Ni denote the proportion of treated individuals in cluster i. Let Y i represent

Author Manuscript

the outcome at the cluster level. In general, Y i may be defined differently depending on
the outcome of interest. For example, in the analysis of the DRC data, Y i may be defined
as the proportion of children in a cluster with malaria. Let Li represent a vector of clusterlevel baseline covariates, including Ni. The covariate vector Li may include summaries of
individual-level covariates, such as the average age of individuals within the cluster. Let
Oi = {Li, Si, Y i} be the observed random variables for cluster i, and assume O1, …, Om are
independent and identically distributed. For notational simplicity, the subscript i is omitted
when not needed.

Author Manuscript

Assume partial interference, i.e., there is no interference between clusters, but there may be
interference between individuals within the same cluster. For example, one individual’s bed
net usage may affect whether or not another individual in the same cluster gets malaria. In
the DRC analysis, clusters are defined according to household geographical location. Thus,
the partial interference assumption is biologically plausible as the Anopheles mosquito has
a limited flight range (< 10 kilometers) and life span (< one month), such that interference
(if present) is likely restricted to individuals within the same cluster. Let A(Ni) denote the
set of all vectors of length Ni with binary entries such that ai = (ai1, ai2, …, aiNi) ∈ A(Ni) is a
vector of possible treatment statuses for a cluster of size Ni. For cluster i, let Y i(ai) represent
the potential outcome if, possibly counter to fact, the cluster had been exposed to ai ∈ A(Ni),
such that Y i(ai) = Y i when Ai = ai.

Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 4

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Population-level effects of interventions such as bed nets can be defined by differences
in expected potential outcomes when the distribution of treatment is altered. For example,
in the absence of interference, the effect of treatment is often defined by the difference
in expected outcomes when all individuals receive treatment versus when no individuals
receive treatment. Here we consider stochastic policies where individuals receive treatment
with some probability between 0 and 1. Define policy α to be the setting where the expected
proportion of individuals in a cluster who receive treatment is α, i.e., Eα(S) = α, where
in general the subscript α denotes the counterfactual scenario in which the policy α is
implemented. For example, P α(A = a ∣ L = l) denotes the conditional probability of treatment
given covariates l in the counterfactual scenario in which policy α is implemented. There are
various ways to define the counterfactual treatment allocation probability P α(A = a ∣ L = l),
and the specific policy α considered in this work is described in Section 2.2. Unlike
stochastic policies previously considered in the absence of interference, e.g., Muñoz and Van
Der Laan11, Kennedy12, Wen et al.13, the policy considered here allows for within-cluster
treatment selection dependence. For more discussion on other stochastic policies in the
presence of partial interference, refer to Lee et al.14. The DRC analysis below considers
policies where different proportions of individuals use bed nets.
Under policy α, the treatment assignment within a cluster is allowed to be stochastic,
governed by a distribution on A which may vary across clusters depending on clusterlevel covariates L. For the stratum of clusters in the population defined by L = l
with the cluster size n, the expected potential outcome under policy α is defined by
∑a ∈ A(n) E Y (a) ∣ L = l P α(A = a ∣ L = l). Here, the conditional expectation of the potential

Author Manuscript

outcome Y (a) at stratum of L = l is averaged over all a ∈ A(n), with corresponding
probabilities P α A = a ∣ L = l . Then, the average potential outcome in the population under
policy α is defined as
μ(α) =

∫ a ∈∑A(n) E{Y (a) ∣ L = l}P (A = a ∣ L = l)d F (l)
α

L

l

(1)

where F L denotes the distribution of baseline covariates L. Effects of interest can be defined
by contrasts in μα for two policies α and α′, e.g.,
δ(α, α′) = μα − μα′ .
(2)

Author Manuscript

Here, effects are defined as a difference in average potential outcomes, but ratios or other
contrasts could be used instead. A primary contrast of interest in the DRC analysis is the
difference in the proportion of children infected with malaria under policies α versus α′.
In the DRC analysis, we will consider three different effects of bed nets: the overall effect,
the effect when treated, and the effect when untreated. All three effects have the form (2)
but differ in how Y i is defined. The overall effect compares the average outcome among all
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 5

Author Manuscript

individuals in a cluster under policies α versus α′. As it is likely that populations of interest
will include a mixture of individuals who would and who would not choose to receive
treatment, the overall effect may be valuable for public health officials and policymakers
in assessing the overall impact of increasing treatment coverage among a population. For
inference about the overall effect, Y i is a summary measure of outcomes in all individuals in
cluster i. For the malaria data analysis, Y i is defined to be the proportion of all children in a
cluster with malaria.

Author Manuscript

Two additional treatment effects are also considered. The effect when untreated contrasts
average outcomes when an individual is untreated under policy α versus policy α′. For this
effect, Y i may be defined by some summary measure of outcomes in untreated individuals.
In the DRC analysis of the effect in the untreated, Y i will be defined as the proportion of
children who do not use bed nets with malaria. If there are no untreated individuals in the
cluster, we adopt the convention Y i = 0 because no untreated individuals had malaria in those
clusters. Similarly, the effect when treated contrasts average outcomes when an individual is
treated under policy α versus policy α′. For the effect when treated in the DRC analysis, Y i
will be the proportion of children who use bed nets with malaria, with Y i = 0 in clusters with
no treated individuals.

Author Manuscript

Causal effects are, in general, defined by contrasts in potential outcomes over the same set
of units15. In this paper, the units are defined to be clusters. While it is natural in many
settings to define units as persons or individuals, in the setting considered here, defining
units as clusters simplifies matters. In particular, this approach avoids complexities that arise
when defining potential outcomes at the individual level, such as nuances regarding casual
estimand definitions16,17, and drawing inference in a manner that appropriately allows for
within-cluster correlation.
Note the effects as defined here could be non-zero due to interference or dependence
between individuals’ treatment propensity and risk of the outcome. For instance, suppose
there is no interference and that individuals with a lower risk of some binary outcome are,
in general, less likely to get treatment. Then, as the policy α tends toward 1, only those with
the smallest outcome risk will be untreated, such that the mean outcome in the untreated will
decrease even in the absence of interference. Nonetheless, the effects defined here could be
of interest to policymakers or from a public health perspective, as these effects describe how
the average outcome changes across policies.
2.2 ∣

Assumptions and Identifiability

Author Manuscript

The following assumptions are made to identify the estimands described above:
Assumption 1 (Consistency). Y i(ai) = Y i when Ai = ai.
Assumption 2 (Conditional exchangeability). Y i(ai) ⫫ Ai ∣ Li for all ai ∈ A(Ni).
The consistency and conditional exchangeability assumptions are analogous to the
assumptions commonly made at the individual level when drawing causal inferences in
the absence of interference, with the key distinction being that here these assumptions are
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 6

Author Manuscript

applied at the cluster level. As in the setting where there is no interference, selection of
the covariates L such that conditional exchangeability is plausible in a particular application
may be informed by subject matter knowledge. Causal graphs18, where the nodes/vertices
represent cluster-level random variables, may also be used to determine sufficient sets of
covariates L for which conditional exchangeability holds. As discussed in the previous
section, the outcome Y may be defined differently depending on the effect of interest. Thus,
the plausibility of the exchangeability assumption and selection of the particular covariates L
may differ depending on the choice of Y . Section 4 discusses the exchangeability assumption
in the context of the malaria example.
Assumption 3 (Weak stratified interference). E Y i(ai) ∣ Li = E Y i(a′i) ∣ Li for all ai,
N

N

a′i ∈ A(Ni) such that ∑j =i 1 aij = ∑j =i 1 aij′ .

Author Manuscript

The weak stratified interference (WSI) assumption supposes that the conditional expectation
of the cluster-level potential outcome given L depends only on the proportion of individuals
treated, but not which particular individuals receive treatment. This assumption is weaker
than the usual “stratified interference”19 assumption, which stipulates that Y i(ai) = Y i(a′i)
N

N

for any two vectors ai, a′i ∈ A(Ni) such that ∑j =i 1 aij = ∑j =i 1 aij′ . The stratified interference
assumption might be unrealistic in some settings, hence, in this paper, WSI is assumed
instead. WSI is a weaker assumption in that stratified interference implies WSI, but that
WSI may also hold in settings where stratified interference does not. Note that assuming
WSI does not resolve the issue of very small cluster-level propensity scores in large
clusters; however, under WSI the proposed method permits inference without using inverse
probability weighting and thus avoids the extreme cluster-level propensity score issue.

Author Manuscript

Assumption 4 (S model). Let π = π(L; ρ) = g−1(ρ0 + ρT1 L), where g is some invertible, userspecified link function such as logit or probit, and ρ = (ρ0, ρT1 )T. Assume
P (S = s ∣ L) = P (S = s ∣ L; ρ) =

N Ns
π (1 − π)N − Ns .
Ns
(3)

Note (3) will hold if Aij ∣ Li for j = 1, …, Ni are i.i.d. Bernoulli random variables with
expectation π(Li), respectively. In this case, Aij ⊥ Aik ∣ Li, i.e., the treatment selection of two
individuals within the same cluster is conditionally independent. This does not, however,
imply marginal independence, i.e., Aij ⊥ Aik. Moreover, provided ρ1 ≠ 0, in general we would

Author Manuscript

expect marginal dependence between Aij and Aik. While (3) is assumed in the rest of this
paper, alternative parametric models for the conditional distribution of S given L could be
assumed instead.
Suppose we are interested in causal estimands corresponding to a counterfactual policy α
where the distribution of S is modified such that α proportion of individuals are treated on
average. In particular, motivated by (3), suppose we would like to draw an inference about
the counterfactual scenario where

Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 7

Author Manuscript

N Ns
πα (1 − πα)N − Ns,
Ns

P α(S = s ∣ L) = P α(S = s ∣ L; γ) =

(4)

where πα = g−1(γ0α + γT1αL) and γ = (γ0α, γT1α)T such that Eα(S) = α. The parameter ρ in (3) is
identifiable from the observable data, whereas the counterfactual parameter γ in (4) are
not identifiable without additional assumptions. As in Barkley et al.,5 assume ρ1 = γ1α;
this assumption implies rank preservation between clusters in treatment propensity. In
other words, if treatment adoption is more likely in cluster i than cluster j, then under
counterfactual policy α, treatment adoption will also be more likely in cluster i than cluster j.
Then, γ0α is obtained from the relationship Eα(S) = α, by solving the equation

Author Manuscript

∫ E (S ∣ L = l; γ , ρ )d F (l) − α = 0
α

0α

L

1

l

(5)

where Eα(S ∣ L = l; γ0α, ρ1) = g−1(γ0α + ρT1 l).
Assumption 5 (Y model). Let η = ℎ−1(β0 + βT1 L + β2S) where ℎ is some invertible, userspecified link function, and β = (β0, βT1 , β2)T. Assume
E(Y ∣ S = s, L = l) = E(Y ∣ S = s, L = l; β) = η .
(6)

Author Manuscript

Note assumption 5 only supposes that the conditional expectation of Y given S and L has
a parametric form, with no additional assumptions placed on the conditional distribution
of Y . For simplicity, an interaction between S and L is omitted from the model of
E(Y ∣ S = s, L = l) but could be included. For the analysis in Section 4, binomial regression
with the link functions g = ℎ = logit are used for the treatment and outcome models.
Under assumptions 1-4, the causal estimands (1) and (2) are identifiable, i.e., can
be expressed as functions of the distribution of the observed random variables. In
particular, from consistency, conditional exchangeability, and WSI, it follows that
N
E{Y i(ai) ∣ Li} = E{Y i ∣ Ai = ai, Li} = E{Y i ∣ Si = ai, Li}, where ai = Ni−1 ∑j =i 1 aij. Therefore, we

Author Manuscript

have the identifiability of μ(α) as follows:
μ(α) =

∫ a ∈∑A(n) E{Y (a) ∣ L = l}P (A = a ∣ L = l)d F (l)
α

l
=

L

E(Y ∣ S = a, L = l)P (A = a ∣ L = l)d F (l)
∫ s ∈∑S(n) a: ∑
a=s
α

L

l
=

∫ s ∈∑S(n) E(Y ∣ S = s, L = l)P (S = s ∣ L = l)d F (l)
α

l

Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

L

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 8

Author Manuscript

where S(n) = {0 ∕ n, 1 ∕ n, …, n ∕ n}, and E Y ∣ S = s, L = l and F L(l) are identifiable from
the observed data Oi = {Li, Si, Y i}, i = 1, …, m, and P α S = s ∣ L = l is also identifiable since

the parameters ρ, γ0α, and thus πα = g−1(γ0α + ρT1 L) are identifiable. The identifiability of the
causal effect δ(α, α′) can be shown similarly. Note the assumption 5 is not required for
identifiability, but it is assumed to facilitate inference as described in the next section.
2.3 ∣

Inference
Estimators for μ(α) can be constructed as follows. First estimate the parameters ρ = (ρ0, ρT1 )T
of model (3) and β = (β0, βT1 , β2)T of model (6) via maximum likelihood; denote these
T

T

T

estimators by ρ = (ρ 0, ρT1 ) and β = (β 0, β1 , β 2) . Next, for a given policy α, let γ 0α denote the
estimator of γ0α obtained by finding the solution to (5) with F L replaced by its empirical

Author Manuscript

distribution, i.e., m−1 ∑mi = 1 Eα(Si ∣ Li; γ0α, ρ1) − α = 0 where Eα(Si ∣ Li; γ0α, ρ1) = g−1(γ0α + ρT1 Li).
T

Let P α(S = s ∣ L) denote (4) evaluated using (γ 0α, ρT1 ) , and let E(Y ∣ S = s, L = l) denote (6)
evaluated using β. Then the g-formula estimator of μ(α) is
μ(α) =

∫ s ∈∑S(n) E(Y ∣ S = s, L = l)P (S = s ∣ L = l)d F (l)
α

L

l

where F L denotes the empirical distribution function of L. Equivalently, the estimator may be
written
μ(α) =

Author Manuscript

m
1
∑ E(Y i ∣ Si = s, Li)P α(Si = s ∣ Li) .
m ∑
i = 1 s ∈ S(Ni)

The estimator for the effects of interest is δ (α, α′) = μ(α) − μ(α′). The estimators ρ, β, γ 0α,
μ(α), μ(α′), and δ (α, α′) are solutions to unbiased estimating equations (see Supporting

Information). Therefore, it follows from standard large-sample estimating equation theory
that the estimators are consistent and asymptotically Normal20. The empirical sandwich
estimators, which are consistent estimators of the asymptotic variances, can be used to
construct point-wise Wald confidence intervals (CIs).
2.4 ∣

Population Strata

Author Manuscript

For the DRC malaria example, the methods described above may be applied directly if
children are considered the population of interest, and we ignore data collected from adults.
Such an approach makes inference about counterfactual scenarios regarding the distribution
of bed net usage in children and is agnostic to bed net use by others in the clusters. However,
the DRC DHS includes bed net data for all individuals, which can be utilized to estimate
the effects of bed net usage by all individuals on the risk of malaria in children. To do
so, the approach above can simply be modified by changing the definition of S to be the
proportion of all individuals in the cluster, not just children, who use bed nets. Alternatively,
one may choose to model separately the proportion of children using bed nets (say S1) and

Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 9

Author Manuscript

the proportion of other individuals in the cluster using bed nets (say S2). In particular, the
population mean estimand μ(α) may be expressed

∑ E(Y ∣ S = s , S = s , L = l)P (S = s ∣ L = l, S = s )P (S = s ∣ L = l)d F (l)
∫s∑
∈S s ∈S
1

l

2

2 1

1

2

2

α

1

1

2

2

α

2

2

L

1

where the policy α here is defined such that individuals in strata 1 and 2 are treated with the
same probability: Eα(S1) = Eα(S2) = Eα(S) = α. More generally, one could consider different
policies α1 and α2 for the two population strata. Inference proceeds analogous to Sections
2.2-2.3, but with separate parametric models for S1 given L, S2 and for S2 given L; such an
approach is taken in the DRC bed net analysis in Section 4.

Author Manuscript

2.5 ∣

G-Null Paradox
In the absence of interference, the parametric g-formula may give rise to the so-called g-null
paradox. That is, certain parametric models are guaranteed to be misspecified under the null
hypothesis of no treatment effect. As a result, the null hypothesis of no treatment effect will
be incorrectly rejected with high probability when the sample size is large7,21,22.
For the setting considered in this paper, the null hypothesis is that the proportion treated S
has no effect on the outcome Y , or that μ(α) = μ(α′) for any two policies α, α′. If S has no
effect on Y , then β2 = 0 and E(Y ∣ S = s, L) = E(Y ∣ L). Therefore,
μ(α) =

∫ E(Y ∣ L = l)s ∈∑S(n) P (S = s ∣ L = l)d F (l) = ∫ E(Y ∣ L = l)d F (l)
α

L

l

L

l

Author Manuscript

(7)

where the second equality follows because ∑s ∈ S(n) P α(S = s ∣ L = l) = 1. The right-hand side
of (7) does not depend on α, so the g-null paradox does not occur here.
3∣

EMPIRICAL EVALUATION
Simulation studies were conducted to evaluate the finite sample properties of the proposed
g-formula estimator. Three separate simulation studies were conducted for the three target
estimands: overall effect, effect when treated, and effect when not treated. For the overall
effect simulation study, 1000 data sets each with m = 125 clusters were stochastically
generated as follows:

Author Manuscript

i.

The number of individuals per cluster Ni was simulated such that P (Ni = 8) = 0.4,
P (Ni = 16) = 0.35, and P (Ni = 20) = 0.25.

ii.

Two cluster-level covariates L1i and L2i were generated, where L1i was Normal
with mean 40 and standard deviation 10, and L2i was such that P (L2i = 0) = 5 ∕ 18,
P (L2i = 1) = 3 ∕ 18, P (L2i = 2) = 4 ∕ 18, P (L2i = 3) = 5 ∕ 18, P (L2i = 4) = 1 ∕ 18.

iii.

For each cluster, the number of treated individuals was drawn from a
Binomial distribution with parameters Ni and πi = expit(ρ0 + ρ1L1i + ρ2L2i) where
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 10

Author Manuscript

ρ = (logit(0.6), − 0.01, − 0.01)T. The proportion of individuals treated per cluster,

Si, was then calculated by dividing the number of treated individuals by Ni.

iv.

For each cluster, the outcome Y i was set equal to Xi ∕ Ni where Xi
was Binomial with parameters Ni and ηi = expit(β0 + β1L1i + β2Si + β3L2i) where
β = (logit(0.6), − 0.01, − 0.8, − 0.01)T.

Correctly specified models of Y given S and L, and of S given L were fit by maximum
likelihood. The asymptotic variance of the estimators was estimated using the empirical
sandwich variance estimator, and point-wise Wald 95% CIs were calculated with these
variance estimates.

Author Manuscript

The true values of estimands for policies α ∈ {0.4, 0.5, 0.6} were calculated analytically
for the data generating process described above. In particular, the true values of γ0α
are the solutions to (5) where πα = expit(γ0α + ρ1L1 + ρ2L2). The counterfactual probabilities
P α(S = s ∣ L) for s ∈ S(N) can then be computed via (4) based on the true values of γ0α, ρ1,

ρ2. Similarly, E(Y ∣ S = s, L) for s ∈ S(N) may be evaluated using (6) and the true value of β.

Finally, the true values of μ(α) can be found using (1).
Results for the overall effect simulation study are given in the top third of Table 1. The
average bias of the proposed g-formula estimators was negligible, and the CIs contained
the true parameter values for approximately 95% of the simulated datasets. The average of
the estimated sandwich standard errors was approximately equal to the empirical standard
errors, with standard error ratios of approximately 1.

Author Manuscript

The simulation study described above was repeated for the effect when treated, with the
following modification. In step (iv), the cluster outcome Y i was set equal to Xi1 ∕ (NiSi) where
Xi1 was Binomial with parameters NiSi and ηi. If there were no treated individuals in a cluster,
then Y i was set to 0. Results for the g-formula estimator of the effect when treated are
presented in the middle part of Table 1. Results are similar to the overall effect, except the
standard error for the g-formula estimator of the effect when treated is larger because fewer
individuals contribute to the outcome.
Finally, a third simulation study was conducted for the effect when untreated. The simulation
steps above were repeated, but with step (iv) modified such that the cluster outcome Y i was
set equal to Xi0 ∕ {Ni(1 − Si)} where Xi0 was Binomial with parameters Ni(1 − Si) and ηi, with
Y i set to 0 if Si = 1. Results are given in the bottom section of Table 1.

Author Manuscript

Additional simulation studies were conducted to compare the g-formula estimator with
the IPW estimator of Barkley et al.5 The same data generating process described
above was repeated, with the exception of steps (iii) and (iv) where instead the
treatment status for each individual was generated as a Bernoulli random variable
with expectation πij = expit(ρ0 + ρ1L1i + ρ2L2i) where ρ = (logit(0.6), − 0.01, − 0.01)T, and
similarly, individual outcomes were generated as Bernoulli random variables with
mean ηij = expit(β0 + β1L1i + β2Si + β3L2i) where β = (logit(0.6), − 0.01, − 0.8, − 0.01)T. For each
simulated dataset, the proposed g-formula estimator and the Barkley et al.5 IPW estimator
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 11

Author Manuscript

were computed. Results in the top panel of Table 2 show both estimators are approximately
unbiased, but the ESE of the IPW estimator is roughly twice as large.

Author Manuscript

Because the IPW estimator is known to not perform well in the presence of large clusters
(as in the bed net study), the simulation study described in the previous paragraph was
repeated, but in step (i), the number of individuals per cluster Ni was simulated under
two additional scenarios: (i) P (Ni = 20) = 0.4, P (Ni = 50) = 0.35, P (Ni = 100) = 0.25, and (ii)
P (Ni = 40) = 0.4, P (Ni = 100) = 0.35, P (Ni = 200) = 0.25. For these simulations, the bias of
the IPW estimator increased as the cluster size increased, and the ESE was an order of
magnitude larger than the g-formula estimator for most estimands; see the middle and
bottom panels of Table 2. While the IPW estimator is consistent as the number of clusters
grows large, there are no established theoretical results showing the IPW estimator is
consistent when the size of the clusters increases while the number of clusters is held fixed.
Moreover, the IPW estimator entails inverse weighting by cluster propensity scores, which
tend to decrease as the cluster sizes increase, leading to greater variability and increased bias
for the simulation setting considered here as shown in Table 2.

4∣

ANALYSIS OF BED NET USE ON MALARIA IN THE DEMOCRATIC

REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO

Author Manuscript

The methods described above were applied to the DRC DHS survey to draw inference about
the effects of bed nets on malaria in children when varying the proportion of children in
this age range who use bed nets. As mentioned in Section 1, a single linkage agglomerative
hierarchical cluster method23 was used to group households of individuals into clusters.
The maximum distance between any two households in the same cluster was constrained
to not exceed 10 kilometers. This distance was selected based on the maximum flight
distance of an Anopheles mosquito24. The GPS coordinates used in the clustering algorithm
were randomly displaced from the actual location to prevent participant identification. Rural
clusters were displaced up to 5 kilometers, while urban clusters were displaced up to 2
kilometers9. Using this clustering algorithm, there were 395 clusters with at least one child
that were not missing spatial information and other covariates. Figure 2 displays the number
of children per cluster, as well as the proportion of these children who used bed nets; on
average, 55% of children utilized bed nets.

Author Manuscript

Because malaria was measured only in children, Y , S, and N for each cluster were defined
based only on children with a measured outcome. Exchangeability was assumed conditional
on the cluster-level proportion of women, as well as cluster-level averages of building
materials (described below), urbanicity, altitude, age, temperature in the month of the survey,
total precipitation in a 10-kilometer radius the month before the survey, and proportion of
agricultural land cover within a 10-kilometer radius in 2013. The building material variable
was defined similarly to Levitz et al.10, where roof and wall materials were summed for each
individual within a cluster. Natural materials were worth 0 points, rudimentary materials 1
point, and finished materials 2 points. Hence, for each individual, the building material
variable was an integer between 0 and 4. The conditional exchangeability assumption

Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 12

Author Manuscript

supposes that, within strata of clusters defined by levels of these eight covariates, the
proportion of children using bed nets is essentially randomized.

Author Manuscript

These covariates were selected based on prior research showing that each covariate
is predictive of both the exposure and the outcome. Gender has been found to be
associated with malaria; in particular, pregnant women may attract more malaria-carrying
mosquitoes and have decreased malaria immunity25,24,26,27,28. Women, and in particular
pregnant women, have been found to use bed nets more often29,27. Age is associated
with malaria prevalence in several studies, with children being particularly vulnerable due
to low malaria immunity30,24,10,26,27,28. Children under five years old, along with older
adults, tend to be more likely to use bed nets31,29. Housing quality and urbanicity are
both associated with malaria prevalence, where traditional homes or sleeping outside are
associated with increased malaria risk24,10,26. Individuals sleeping in temporary housing
such as tents or those in poor, rural areas may not be able to afford bed nets or housing
that prevents mosquito entry26,28, while individuals in urban areas may be more inclined
to use bed nets due to increased exposure to education and health systems27. Altitude,
temperature, precipitation, and agricultural land cover are all associated with malaria
prevalence, with more favorable climates for malaria parasites and mosquito larvae leading
to increased malaria risk24,10,26,28. In areas where the perceived malaria risk is low due to
unfavorable conditions for mosquitoes or malaria parasites, bed net use may be decreased31.
Additionally, in warmer temperatures, individuals may choose not to use bed nets if it’s too
hot when using them or if they sleep outdoors31,28.

Author Manuscript

In addition to conditional exchangeability, WSI was assumed conditional on the same set
of covariates as the conditional exchangeability assumption. The WSI assumption supposes
that within the strata of clusters having the same covariate values, the expected cluster-level
malaria outcome depends only on the proportion of children using bed nets but not on which
particular children use bed nets.
Figure 3 displays g-formula estimates and corresponding point-wise 95% confidence
intervals of the population mean estimands over a range of policies α ∈ [0.1, 0.9] in all
individuals, when treated, and when untreated. The left panel of Figure 3 shows that the
overall risk of malaria decreases as α increases, which is not surprising since bed nets are
known to protect against malaria and bed net usage increases with α. The middle panel of
Figure 3 demonstrates that the risk of malaria when treated also decreases as α increases. On
the other hand, there appears to be little or no effect when untreated (right panel of Figure
3).

Author Manuscript

Estimates and point-wise 95% confidence intervals of the overall effects, effects when
treated, and effects when untreated for different policies α compared to the current factual
policy α′ = 0.55 are displayed in Figure 4. These estimates approximate the expected change
in the number of cases of malaria due to increasing or decreasing bed net use relative
to current utilization. For example, δ (α = 0.8, α′ = 0.55) = − 0.056 (95% CI −0.076, −0.035)
indicates that if 80% of children in a cluster were to use bed nets, then we would expect 56
fewer cases of malaria per 1000 children on average. Similarly, for the effect when treated,
δ (α = 0.8, α′ = 0.55) = − 0.077 (95% CI −0.10, −0.054), indicating we would expect 77 fewer
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 13

Author Manuscript

cases of malaria per 1000 treated children on average if 80% of children in a cluster were to
use bed nets. On the other hand, the effect when untreated for α = 0.8 compared to α′ = 0.55
is −0.011 (95% CI −0.045, 0.023), suggesting no or modest benefit of increasing bed net use
to non-users.
For the sake of comparison, the Barkley et al.5 IPW estimator was also applied to the DRC
DHS data to estimate the bed net effects. However, the mixed effects model used to estimate
the group propensity scores did not converge, hence it was not possible to compute the IPW
estimates. Given that the DRC data includes several large clusters, it is not surprising issues
were encountered when attempting to compute the IPW estimator. See Saul and Hudgens32
for further discussion related to computational issues of partial interference IPW estimators.
A possible workaround would be to exclude the large clusters33, but this would inefficiently
discard data and limit the generalizability of the results.

Author Manuscript

The results above are based on the clustering of households such that the maximum distance
between any two households in the same cluster was 10 km. Sensitivity analyses were
performed, where clusters were instead defined based on maximum distances of 5 km and
2.5 km. There were 415 clusters in the 5 km analysis and 449 clusters in the 2.5 km
analysis that were not missing spatial information and had at least one child. Population
mean estimates were very similar between the 2.5 km, 5 km, and 10 km analyses; see Figure
5.

Author Manuscript

The g-formula approach relies on the correct specification of the outcome model, and
thus, assessing the robustness of results to model specification is essential when using this
method in practice. Various sensitivity analyses of the DRC data did not result in meaningful
changes in the conclusions. For example, the results in Supplementary Figures S1 and S2
show the population mean estimates were similar to the original estimates when each of
the eight covariates was individually dropped from the outcome model. The sensitivity of
the results to the specified outcome regression link function was also assessed. Results
in Supplementary Figure S3 show that when the probit link function was used instead
of the logit link function for treatment and outcome models, the estimates were almost
identical to the original scenario. Finally, an interaction term between S and the average total
precipitation in a 10 km radius at the month before the survey was included in the outcome
model, and the estimates did not appreciably change relative to the original estimates from
the model without the interaction term (Supplementary Figure S3).

Author Manuscript

To investigate the effect of changing the proportion of the entire population who use bed
nets, the 10-kilometer clusters were also analyzed using the methods from Section 2.4
with separate parametric models fit for S1 given L, S2 and for S2 given L. The estimated
population means for the general population policy compared to the children-only policy
are shown in Figure 6. Changes in the general population policy are associated with greater
changes in the mean outcome in all individuals and when treated compared to the childrenonly policy. However, the largest difference in estimated population means between the
general population policy and the children-only policy is only 0.05. For the effect when
untreated, the estimates are approximately the same for both the children-only and general
population policies.

Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Author Manuscript

5∣

Page 14

DISCUSSION
In the presence of partial interference, the proposed g-formula estimator is an alternative to
existing IPW estimators, such as those proposed in Tchetgen Tchetgen and VanderWeele3.
The g-formula estimator can accommodate large clusters, unlike IPW estimators34,33, and
does not suffer from the g-null paradox that may occur in the absence of interference. Like
the IPW estimators of Papadogeorgou et al.4 and Barkley et al.,5 the proposed methods
target counterfactual estimands, which allow for within-cluster dependence of treatment
selection and thus may be more relevant to policymakers. While motivated by infectious
disease prevention studies, the g-formula methods developed in this paper are applicable in
other settings where partial interference may be present.

Author Manuscript

The approach used in this paper requires only cluster-level covariates, exposures, and
outcomes, and thus may be of particular utility in settings where individual-level data is
not available and only cluster-level variables are observed. As noted by one reviewer, the
approach in this paper accommodates partial interference by essentially reframing as a
‘classic causal inference’ problem where the clusters as units and i.i.d. unit-level data are
observed. Moreover, the g-formula estimator could easily be adapted to the no interference
setting where the exposure is a fraction between 0 and 1.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

The analysis of the DRC Demographic and Health Survey data in Section 4 provides
evidence that increasing the proportion of children who use bed nets reduces the proportion
of children with malaria. The protective effect of bed nets was found to be more pronounced
in children who use bed nets compared to children who do not. These results complement
existing research on the population-level effects of bed nets. For example, communitylevel effects of bed net use have previously been found to affect the overall risk of
malaria among individuals within the community35,36. Additionally, previous studies have
shown that community-level bed net coverage can have indirect (i.e., spillover) protective
effects37,38,39,40. Similar to the results in this paper, Escamilla et al.41 found that the
protective association of community-level bed net coverage with malaria morbidity in
Malawi was greater among children who used bed nets compared to children who did not.
Likewise, using the same DRC data as in this paper, Levitz et al.10 found community-level
bed net use was associated with a lower prevalence of malaria, and in individuals who used
bed nets, the odds of malaria were further diminished. The DRC data analysis presented
in Section 4 extends these previous association-type analyses of population-level bed net
usage to inference about the different causal effects of bed nets. Such inference quantifies
the expected number of malaria cases prevented for different levels of bed net coverage
when individuals use bed nets as well as when individuals do not, thus providing a clearer
interpretation of and additional insight into the population-level impact of bed nets for
investigators and policymakers.
There are several possible areas of further methodological research related to this paper. For
example, the consistency of the proposed g-formula estimator requires that the parametric
models be correctly specified. These models make explicit assumptions on the clusterlevel data generating process (DGP) without explicitly imposing any assumptions on the
individual-level DGP. That said, individual-level DGPs that do not marginalize to the

Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 15

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

assumed cluster-level DGP are implicitly assumed to not hold. Future research could explore
relaxing these parametric assumptions, perhaps by using semiparametric or nonparametric
(i.e., machine learning) methods. In no interference setting, Kennedy12 considers estimands
similar to the estimands in this paper corresponding to average potential outcomes when the
proportion treated is increased. Kennedy proposes nonparametric doubly robust estimators,
which tend to have smaller bias but larger variance than the parametric approach considered
in this paper. Extensions of the proposed method which relax the partial interference
assumption and thereby allowing for more general (e.g., spatial) interference42,43 could be
considered. The method developed here considers only a univariate exposure, such as bed
net usage in the malaria study, and makes no assumptions about other possible exposures.
Future research could extend the methods in this paper to draw inference about the joint
effects of multivariate exposures in the presence of partial interference. In the context of
malaria, such methods could be used to assess the effects of policies on bed net usage
and other risk factors for malaria, such as spraying of insecticides or other approaches
to mosquito control. The RTS,S/AS01 malaria vaccine was recently recommended for
widespread use by the World Health Organization44, and it would also be of interest to
assess the joint effect of bed nets and vaccination. As the total number of bed nets may be
limited in practice, it may be helpful to extend the proposed methods to estimate an optimal
bed net allocation strategy based on cluster characteristics, subject to some constraints on
the total number of bed nets available45. Finally, the approach in this paper defines the unit
as the cluster, which has advantages but does not easily permit inference about the direct
effect. G-formula based estimates of direct effects could be developed, presumably based on
individual-level potential outcomes.

Supplementary Material
Author Manuscript

Refer to Web version on PubMed Central for supplementary material.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank two anonymous reviewers for helpful suggestions. The authors also thank Shaina Alexandria,
Bryan Blette, M. Elizabeth Halloran, Sam Rosin, Bonnie Shook-Sa, and Jaffer Zaidi for providing comments on the
manuscript. The authors also thank Mark Janko for providing temperature, precipitation, and agricultural density
data. This work was partially supported by NIH grants R01 AI085073 and T32 ES007018.

DATA AVAILABILITY STATEMENT
The DRC survey data is available upon request at http://www.dhsprogram.com, and the
corresponding spatial data is available at http://spatialdata.dhsprogram.com.

Author Manuscript

References
1. Cox DR. Planning of Experiments. New York: Wiley. 1958.
2. Sobel ME. What do randomized studies of housing mobility demonstrate? Causal inference in the
face of interference. Journal of the American Statistical Association 2006; 101(476): 1398–1407.
3. Tchetgen Tchetgen EJ, VanderWeele TJ. On causal inference in the presence of interference.
Statistical Methods in Medical Research 2012; 21(1): 55–75. [PubMed: 21068053]

Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 16

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

4. Papadogeorgou G, Mealli F, Zigler CM. Causal inference with interfering units for cluster
and population level treatment allocation programs. Biometrics 2019; 75(3): 778–787. [PubMed:
30859545]
5. Barkley BG, Hudgens MG, Clemens JD, Ali M, Emch ME. Causal inference from observational
studies with clustered interference, with application to a cholera vaccine study. Annals of Applied
Statistics 2020; 14(3): 1432–1448.
6. Park C, Kang H. Efficient semiparametric estimation of network treatment effects under partial
interference. Biometrika 2022; 109(4): 1015–1031.
7. Robins J A new approach to causal inference in mortality studies with sustained exposure period
—application to control of the healthy worker survivor effect. Mathematical Modelling 1986; 7:
1393–1512.
8. Hernán MA, Robins JM. Estimating causal effects from epidemiological data. Journal of
Epidemiology & Community Health 2006; 60(7): 578–586. [PubMed: 16790829]
9. Ministére du Plan et Suivi de la Mise en oeuvre de la Révolution de la Modernité (MPSMRM),
Ministére de la Santé Publique (MSP), and ICF International. République Démocratique du Congo
Enquête Démographique et de Santé (EDS-RDC) 2013-2014 [Dataset]. CDPR61SD, CDGE61FL. ;
Rockville, Maryland: 2014. Rockville, Maryland, USA: MPSMRM, MSP and ICF International
[Producers], ICF [Distributer].
10. Levitz L, Janko M, Mwandagalirwa K, et al. Effect of individual and community-level bed net
usage on malaria prevalence among under-fives in the Democratic Republic of Congo. Malaria
Journal 2018; 17(1): 39. [PubMed: 29347953]
11. Muñoz ID, Van Der Laan M. Population intervention causal effects based on stochastic
interventions. Biometrics 2012; 68(2): 541–549. [PubMed: 21977966]
12. Kennedy EH. Nonparametric Causal Effects Based on Incremental Propensity Score Interventions.
Journal of the American Statistical Association 2019; 114(526): 645–656.
13. Wen L, Marcus JL, Young JG. Intervention treatment distributions that depend on the observed
treatment process and model double robustness in causal survival analysis. Statistical Methods in
Medical Research 2023; 32(3): 509–523. [PubMed: 36597699]
14. Lee C, Zeng D, Hudgens MG. Efficient Nonparametric Estimation of Stochastic Policy Effects
with Clustered Interference. Journal of the American Statistical Association 2024: In press.
15. Rubin DB. Causal inference using potential outcomes: Design, modeling, decisions. Journal of the
American Statistical Association 2005; 100(469): 322–331.
16. VanderWeele TJ, Tchetgen Tchetgen EJ. Effect partitioning under interference in two-stage
randomized vaccine trials. Statistics & Probability Letters 2011; 81(7): 861–869. [PubMed:
21532912]
17. Crawford FW, Morozova O, Buchanan AL, Spiegelman D. Interpretation of the individual effect
under treatment spillover. American Journal of Epidemiology 2019; 188(8): 1407–1409. [PubMed:
31094425]
18. Richardson TS, Robins JM. Single world intervention graphs (SWIGs): A unification of the
counterfactual and graphical approaches to causality. Center for the Statistics and the Social
Sciences, University of Washington Series. Working Paper 2013; 128(30): 2013.
19. Hudgens MG, Halloran ME. Toward causal inference with interference. Journal of the American
Statistical Association 2008; 103(482): 832–842. [PubMed: 19081744]
20. Stefanski LA, Boos DD. The calculus of M-estimation. The American Statistician 2002; 56(1):
29–38.
21. Robins JM, Wasserman L. Estimation of effects of sequential treatments by reparameterizing
directed acyclic graphs. Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on Uncertainty in Artificial
Intelligence 1997.
22. Taubman SL, Robins JM, Mittleman MA, Hernán MA. Intervening on risk factors for coronary
heart disease: an application of the parametric g-formula. International Journal of Epidemiology
2009; 38(6): 1599–1611. [PubMed: 19389875]
23. Everitt BS, Landau S, Leese M, Stahl D. Cluster Analysis. John Wiley. Fifth ed. 2011.
24. Janko MM, Irish SR, Reich BJ, et al. The links between agriculture, Anopheles mosquitoes,
and malaria risk in children younger than 5 years in the Democratic Republic of the Congo: a
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 17

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

population-based, cross-sectional, spatial study. The Lancet Planetary Health 2018; 2(2): e74–e82.
[PubMed: 29457150]
25. Lindsay S, Ansell J, Selman C, Cox V, Hamilton K, Walraven G. Effect of pregnancy on exposure
to malaria mosquitoes. The Lancet 2000; 355(9219): 1972.
26. Smith J, Mumbengegwi D, Haindongo E, et al. Malaria risk factors in northern Namibia: the
importance of occupation, age and mobility in characterizing high-risk populations. PLOS ONE
2021; 16(6): 1–23.
27. Kuse K, Chikako T, Bacha R, Hagan J Jr, Seidu AA, Ahinkorah B. Multilevel modelling of
individual, community and regional level factors associated with insecticide-treated net usage
among pregnant women in Ethiopia. Healthcare 2022; 10(8).
28. CDC: Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Parasites-Malaria https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/
malaria/index.html; 2023.
29. Olapeju B, Choiriyyah I, Lynch M, et al. Age and gender trends in insecticide-treated net use
in sub-Saharan Africa: a multi-country analysis. Malaria Journal 2018; 17(423): 1–12. [PubMed:
29291736]
30. Carneiro I, Roca-Feltrer A, Griffin J, et al. Age-patterns of malaria vary with severity, transmission
intensity and seasonality in sub-Saharan Africa: a systematic review and pooled analysis. PLOS
ONE 2010; 5(2): 1–10.
31. Xu JW, Liao YM, Liu H, Nie RH, Havumaki J. Use of bed nets and factors that influence bed net
use among Jinuo ethnic minority in southern China. PLOS ONE 2014; 9(7): e103780. [PubMed:
25080267]
32. Saul BC, Hudgens MG. A recipe for inferference: Start with causal inference. Add interference.
Mix well with R. Journal of Statistical Software 2017; 82(2).
33. Chakladar S, Hudgens MG, Halloran ME, Clemens JD, Ali M, Emch ME. Inverse probability
weighted estimators of vaccine effects accommodating partial interference and censoring.
Biometrics 2022; 78: 777–788. [PubMed: 33768557]
34. Liu L, Hudgens MG, Saul B, Clemens JD, Ali M, Emch ME. Doubly robust estimation in
observational studies with partial interference. Stat 2019; 8(1): e214. [PubMed: 31440374]
35. Binka FN, Kubaje A, Adjuik M, et al. Impact of permethrin impregnated bednets on child
mortality in Kassena-Nankana district, Ghana: a randomized controlled trial. Tropical Medicine &
International Health 1996; 1(2): 147–154. [PubMed: 8665378]
36. Hii JLK, Smith T, Vounatsou P, et al. Area effects of bednet use in a malaria-endemic area in Papua
New Guinea. Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 2001; 95(1):
7–13. [PubMed: 11280071]
37. Binka FN, Indome F, Smith T. Impact of spatial distribution of permethrin-impregnated bed nets on
child mortality in rural northern Ghana.. The American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene
1998; 59(1): 80–85. [PubMed: 9684633]
38. Howard SC, Omumbo J, Nevill C, Some ES, Donnelly CA, Snow RW. Evidence for a mass
community effect of insecticide-treated bednets on the incidence of malaria on the Kenyan coast.
Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 2000; 94(4): 357–360.
[PubMed: 11127232]
39. Maxwell CA, Msuya E, Sudi M, Njunwa KJ, Carneiro IA, Curtis CF. Effect of community-wide
use of insecticide-treated nets for 3–4 years on malarial morbidity in Tanzania. Tropical Medicine
and International Health 2002; 7(12): 1003–1008. [PubMed: 12460390]
40. Hawley WA, Phillips-Howard PA, Ter Kuile FO, et al. Community-wide effects of permethrintreated bed nets on child mortality and malaria morbidity in western Kenya. The American Journal
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 2003; 68(4_suppl): 121–127. [PubMed: 12749495]
41. Escamilla V, Alker A, Dandalo L, et al. Effects of community-level bed net coverage on malaria
morbidity in Lilongwe, Malawi. Malaria Journal 2017; 16(142): 1–9. [PubMed: 28049519]
42. Wang Y, Samii C, Chang H, Aronow P. Design-based inference for spatial experiments with
interference. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.13599 2020.
43. Leung MP. Rate-optimal cluster-randomized designs for spatial interference. The Annals of
Statistics 2022; 50(5): 3064–3087.

Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 18

Author Manuscript

44. Maxmen A Scientists hail historic malaria vaccine approval-but point to challenges ahead. Nature
2021. DOI: 10.1038/d41586-021-02755-5.
45. Ananth A Optimal treatment assignment rules on networked populations. tech. rep, Cornell
University;: 2020.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 19

Author Manuscript
Figure 1.

Author Manuscript

Malaria bed net study in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Left map: province-level
bed net usage. Right map: prevalence of malaria in children who do not use bed nets.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 20

Author Manuscript
Figure 2.

Author Manuscript

Malaria bed net study in the Democratic Republic of the Congo. Left panel: number of
children with a measured malaria outcome per cluster. Right panel: proportion of children
who used bed nets per cluster.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 21

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 3.

Estimates of the population mean estimands from the malaria bed net study. The proportion
of treated children is denoted by policy α. The shaded regions indicate point-wise 95%
confidence intervals.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 22

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 4.

Estimated effects from the malaria bed net study. The proportion of treated children is
denoted by policy α. Effects contrast α with α′ = 0.55, the current factual policy. The shaded
regions indicate point-wise 95% confidence intervals.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 23

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 5.

Estimates of the population mean estimands from the malaria bed net study. The proportion
of treated children is denoted by policy α. Solid black lines represent 10 km, solid gray lines
represent 5 km, and dashed lines represent 2.5 km clusters.

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 24

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript

Figure 6.

Estimates of the population mean estimands from the malaria bed net study for the childrenonly policy (solid lines) and general population policy (dashed lines).

Author Manuscript
Author Manuscript
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 25

Table 1

Author Manuscript

Summary of simulation study results as described in Section 3. Truth: true value of the estimand targeted by
the estimator. Bias: average bias of the g-formula estimates over 1000 datasets. Cov%: empirical coverage of
Wald 95% CIs. ASE: average of estimated sandwich standard errors. ESE: empirical standard error. SER:
ASE/ESE.
Estimand

Truth

Bias

Cov%

ASE

ESE

SER

All Individuals

Author Manuscript

μ(α = 0.4)

0.418

0.000

94%

0.0147

0.0153

0.96

μ(α = 0.5)

0.399

−0.000

94%

0.0119

0.0121

0.98

μ(α = 0.6)

0.380

−0.000

94%

0.0145

0.0149

0.97

δ(α = 0.6, α′ = 0.4)

−0.038

−0.001

94%

0.0172

0.0180

0.95

δ(α = 0.6, α′ = 0.5)

−0.019

−0.000

94%

0.0084

0.0089

0.95

δ(α = 0.5, α′ = 0.4)

−0.019

−0.000

94%

0.0087

0.0091

0.96

μ1(α = 0.4)

0.418

−0.002

95%

0.0243

0.0242

1.00

μ1(α = 0.5)

0.399

−0.001

96%

0.0174

0.0165

1.05

μ1(α = 0.6)

0.380

0.000

95%

0.0184

0.0178

1.03

δ1(α = 0.6, α′ = 0.4)

−0.038

0.002

93%

0.0255

0.0267

0.96

δ1(α = 0.6, α′ = 0.5)

−0.019

0.001

93%

0.0126

0.0132

0.96

δ1(α = 0.5, α′ = 0.4)

−0.019

0.001

93%

0.0129

0.0135

0.96

When Treated

When Untreated

Author Manuscript

μ0(α = 0.4)

0.418

−0.001

95%

0.0185

0.0188

0.99

μ0(α = 0.5)

0.399

−0.000

96%

0.0173

0.0167

1.03

μ0(α = 0.6)

0.380

0.000

96%

0.0235

0.0231

1.02

δ0(α = 0.6, α′ = 0.4)

−0.038

0.001

94%

0.0248

0.0259

0.96

δ0(α = 0.6, α′ = 0.5)

−0.019

0.000

94%

0.0122

0.0127

0.96

δ0(α = 0.5, α′ = 0.4)

−0.019

0.000

94%

0.0126

0.0131

0.96

Author Manuscript
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

Kilpatrick et al.

Page 26

Table 2

Author Manuscript

Summary of simulation study results comparing g-formula and IPW as described in Section 3. Truth: true
value of the estimand targeted by the estimator. Bias: average bias of the g-formula and IPW estimates over
1000 datasets. ESE: empirical standard error. Results are for all individuals (overall effect).
Estimand

Truth

G-Formula Bias

G-Formula ESE

IPW Bias

IPW ESE

125 clusters of sizes 8, 16, 20

μ(α = 0.4)

0.418

−0.000

0.015

−0.003

0.035

μ(α = 0.5)

0.399

0.000

0.012

−0.001

0.014

μ(α = 0.6)

0.380

0.000

0.014

−0.003

0.024

δ(α = 0.6, α′ = 0.4)

−0.038

0.001

0.017

0.000

0.037

δ(α = 0.6, α′ = 0.5)

−0.019

0.000

0.009

−0.003

0.020

δ(α = 0.5, α′ = 0.4)

−0.019

0.000

0.009

0.003

0.029

Author Manuscript

125 clusters of sizes 20, 50, 100

μ(α = 0.4)

0.418

−0.000

0.011

−0.006

0.247

μ(α = 0.5)

0.399

−0.000

0.007

−0.002

0.016

μ(α = 0.6)

0.380

0.000

0.011

−0.008

0.266

δ(α = 0.6, α′ = 0.4)

−0.038

0.000

0.018

−0.002

0.362

δ(α = 0.6, α′ = 0.5)

−0.019

0.000

0.009

−0.006

0.262

δ(α = 0.5, α′ = 0.4)

−0.019

0.000

0.009

0.004

0.240

125 clusters of sizes 40, 100, 200

Author Manuscript

μ(α = 0.4)

0.418

0.000

0.010

−0.032

0.299

μ(α = 0.5)

0.399

0.000

0.005

−0.005

0.021

μ(α = 0.6)

0.380

−0.000

0.010

−0.047

0.172

δ(α = 0.6, α′ = 0.4)

−0.038

−0.001

0.018

−0.015

0.339

δ(α = 0.6, α′ = 0.5)

−0.019

−0.000

0.009

−0.042

0.166

δ(α = 0.5, α′ = 0.4)

−0.019

−0.000

0.009

0.027

0.291

Author Manuscript
Stat Med. Author manuscript; available in PMC 2025 July 10.

